

At that time it looked like a plane ahead of its times with a state of the art aerodynamic design, high manoeuvrability and it had excellent safety features like the failure of one engine did not damage the other. Its armament consisted of four 30mm Aden cannons that could fire 1400 rounds-per-minute, 50 MATRA-type unguided rockets, four underwing hardpoints that could carry extra fuel tanks or air-to-ground rockets or up to 1800 
kilograms of bombs. Overall it was a great package as Marut was aggressively priced at 66 lakh rupees which was a great price even for that time.




````````But there was one big problem. This supersonic plane designed to fly at a speed of Mach-2 was not even able to cross Mach-1. The problem was not with the plane but with the engines. The Marut was planned to be powered by a 
pair of British-designed Bristol Siddeley Orpheus-12 afterburning engines which was under development at that time for Gnat-Mark-2 and a NATO light fighter. So, Marut was temporarily using an older Orpheus-703 non-afterburning 
engine that produced 44% less power In a turn of events, NATO cancelled the aircraft for which this engine was being developed for, and thus they pulled the funding for this engine. And the manufacturer asked India to underwrite the engine development costs of 1.5 million pounds which the Indian government refused and hence,  
this engine was never developed leaving the Marut without the engines it was designed around. 1.5 million pounds or 2 crore rupees was not a large sum by even the standards of the 1960s but it may have looked like an outrageous amount when compared with the cost of development of the entire aircraft till that point which was just 4 crores. This short-sighted decision wrecked the entire project as it initiated a lengthy and frustrating search for an alternative engine. 
Soviets offered RD9 engine which was found to be technically suiting but required extensive modification and Soviet engineers refused to guarantee anything more than Mach-1.4 speed while India insisted that it needed Mach-2 as Pakistan had just received Lockheed Starfighter from the US which had a speed of Mach-2. Later France offered its ATAR-9 turbojet engine which was used in the likes of Dassault Mirage and Super-Etendard and had 60% more power than what Marut needed but India reportedly showed no interest.

At that time, Egypt was also trying to build a similar supersonic fighter led by another legendary Nazi aircraft designer - Willy Messerschmitt who had designed the World’s first operational jet fighter, the Me-262 and the 
infamous BF-109 which is the most produced fighter in history. He had escaped to Spain after the war where he had started making a fighter jet for them but due to spiralling costs and cheaper American alternatives, Spain cancelled the project. ````````````DONE`````````


Egypt which was eager to build its own fighter jet in the fear of sanctions saw this as an opportunity and acquired the entire project along with the equipment and employees from Spain. They were also temporarily using the same Orpheus 703 engine, but Egypt had decided to build their own engine from scratch and had recruited Ferdinand Brandner who was a legendary engine designer of Nazi Germany. After the war, while trying to flee to Prague, he was captured by the Soviets and then he worked in the Soviet Union for a few years building engines for them including the most powerful turboprop engine in the world until he escaped to Austria. By 1965, Egypt was spending more money on designing this aircraft using foreign talent than their total investment in its entire civilian industry. And, when Bradner learned India was also building a similar plane, he came to India, met Tank and negotiated a deal under which India will share the engine development cost and also provide two test pilots. This was because  
Egypt did not have any capable test pilots and they were unable to hire anyone from elsewhere. 
In 1966, a Marut was taken to Egypt along with a 30 member HAL team. They fitted it with their engine and conducted nearly 100 test-flights, but at that time tensions were rising between Israel and its neighbouring Arabian countries after Egyptian president in an act-of-war blocked Israel’s access to the Red Sea and mobilized their army. Spooked by this, Israel launched a preemptive strike in which 90% of Egyptian aircraft were bombed while on the ground including a plane used for testing the engines. After that Israel captured large swaths of land and then forced for a peace agreement. The Indian team came close to being hit and had to return immediately leaving Marut behind. In the aftermath of the war, Egypt needed a new air-force fast and could not afford to pour more money into a long drawn out fighter jet program and thus the project was cancelled and they immediately purchased Mig-21 from the Soviets. The Indian government made no attempts to either acquire the engine or the engine development 
team thus losing the entire investment. 

In 1962 Chinese President Mao Zedong was facing 
a huge public protest over his poor agricultural  

policies that resulted in the largest famine in 
human history which killed over 50 million people.  

To create a huge distraction and to unite 
the public against a common external enemy,  

he started a war with India which had a very 
friendly relation with China at that time.

This surprise war spooked India to the core, and 
due to the urgent need to beef-up the airforce,  

India bought Mig-21 interceptor and 
Sukhoi-7 ground attack aircraft from  

the Soviets in thousands of quantities. 
Both of them were Mach 2 capable and  

competed in the same roles as Marut 
thus killing the need for this project.

Without being able to find a suitable 
engine, and without much political interest,  

many of the intended features of Marut were 
cancelled and it was handed over to air-force  

in 1967 while still being fitted with its 
temporary engine. The air-force reluctantly  

purchased 147 Maruts as they considered it to 
be only marginally superior to their existing  

fleet of Hunter aircraft. Kurt Tank left 
HAL the same year and returned to Germany.

In the 1971 Bangladesh liberation war, the 
Marut remained in the thick of the action,  

strafing airfields, bombing ammunition dumps, and 
hitting tanks and artillery on the frontlines,  

cementing its position as a capable ground-attack 
aircraft. Several Maruts managed to return to  

base on just one engine after the other 
was shot up. The jet’s flight controls  

were designed to revert to manual control 
automatically if the hydraulic system failed,  

and many flew home safely after the hydraulics 
were shot out. Major Bakshi of 220-squadron  

even scored an air-to-air kill of a 
much superior Pakistani F-86 Sabre.  

No Marut was lost in air-to-air combat 
but three were lost to enemy ground fire.

The Marut proved its mettle by playing a key role 
in the legendary battle of Longewala in which a  

brigade of 3000 Pakistani soldiers accompanied 
by 40 tanks attacked India at midnight intending  

to capture large swaths of territory. However, 
they were stopped by a small border post guarded  

by just 120 Indian soldiers who had just one 
jeep mounted recoilless gun and 10 camels.

At that time the Indian Air force 
did not have night flying capability,  

so these soldiers had to hold their position 
till morning and to everyone’s surprise,  

they were able to not only defend 
themselves but were able to destroy  

12 Tanks with their jeep mounted recoilless 
gun and also cause huge Pakistani casualties.

At sunrise a squadron of Maruts accompanied 
by 4 Hawker Hunter aircraft started raining  

fire upon the Pakistani formation. Without 
effective air support from the Pakistani  

air force, the tanks and armoured vehicles were 
sitting ducks to the Maruts and many attempted  

to run back to Pakistan. India did not push 
home the advantage and allowed them to flee.

At the end of the battle, Pakistan 
lost more than 200 soldiers,  

36 tanks and over 100 vehicles while India 
lost just two soldiers, one jeep and five  

camels. This outcome is particularly remarkable 
as Indian aircraft did not have guided anti-tank  

missiles that give modern ground-attack 
planes high lethality. At the end of war,  

93000 Pakistani soldiers surrendered 
and a new country - Bangladesh was born.

There were several proposals to make a second version of Marut with better engines and features. Even Kurt Tank had proposed an aircraft called HF-73 with the British Rolls-Royce RB199 engines which were three times as powerful as the current engine. But later, access to this engine was denied due to concerns that India may end up building a better aircraft than the western alternatives. By then everyone had realized that it was more profitable to sell India fighter jets rather than selling just the engines and enabling India to become a future competitor. India had set up its own engine research organization called GTRE in 1959 which tried several times to modify the existing engines to gain more power. In 1970, while testing a reheated version of the engine which had 25% more power, India’s foremost test pilot Group Captain Suranjan Das met with a fatal accident when his canopy malfunctioned. Although the accident was not caused by the improved engine, this incident caused the cancellation of any further engine development. The Marut did not have advanced sighting systems or cutting edge navigation systems or powerful engines but it did get the job done in the ground attack role. Moreover, being an indigenous design, it presented scope for further growth with no Intellectual Property Rights or technical roadblock. Despite its inherent potential to form the foundation of a robust indigenous aircraft industry, Marut was withdrawn from service in 1982 and no further versions were made. The Air-force instead went on to buy the British built Jaguar and Soviet-built Mig-23. By the time India decided to make Tejas - the second fighter jet in the late 1980s, the skills and experience gained from this project was lost due to lack of continuity and they had to start from scratch again. It would not be unfair to say that for want of an engine, an industry was lost.

The Air Force was not unhappy with 
this situation, as they were able to  

purchase ready-made aircraft from experienced 
foreign companies. Put plainly, they were not  

confident of HAL’s ability to design and develop 
advanced aircraft required by them. The HAL was  

not unhappy either as they were having enough 
business through production under licence.  

The bureaucrats were not unhappy either, as they 
did not have to answer any embarrassing questions  

from the Parliament. And the government 
was not unhappy either as they did not  

have to deal with the delays and problems 
associated with such complicated projects.

Marut had a great design and proved to be 
the safest plane India had at that time.  

This project was also the first attempt of 
its kind anywhere outside the major powers  

and unlike the fighter jet programs of Argentina, 
Spain and Egypt, the Marut entered production and  

fought well in a war with good serviceability 
records. And overall it had cost just 21 crore  

rupees for the entire project including 
testing of various engines over 19 years.

But unfortunately, the Marut project 
was hampered by over-ambitious goals,  

poor government oversight and underpowered 
engines, producing a subsonic light attack  

plane—foreshadowing some of the 
difficulties that would plague  

India’s second fighter jet Tejas which has 
been under development for over 40 years.


